# Conditional ARF Feature Importance (cARFi)

This repository contains the code and material to reproduce the results
of the manuscript *"Conditional Feature Importance with Generative Modeling
using Adversarial Random Forests"* which is published in the *Proceedings of the 
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2025* (see [Citation](#citation)).

The core method introduced in our paper, cARFi, is implemented in the R script 
located at `cARFi.R`. This script includes the main functions and including a
description of all parameters and how to use them.

The repository is structured as follows:

* `eval_bike_sharing/` contains the code to evaluate the cARFi method on 
the Bike-Sharing dataset considering various conditioning sets of variables (Fig. 4)
* `eval_conditioning_set/` contains the code to compare cARFi under various 
conditionng sets against some marginal (PFI, SAGE) and conditional methods 
(CS, CPI with Gaussian and sequential knockoffs, LOCO) on our modified DAG of
König et al. (2020) (Fig. 3)
* `eval_mixed_data/` contains the mixed data simulation based on the DAG of 
Blesch et al. (2023) (Fig. 2 and Appendix S7 + S8)
* `eval_proof_of_concept/` contains the proof of concept simulation (Fig. 1 and
Appendix S1-S6)
* `figures/` contains the figures generated by the simulations and analyses from 
above

You can run the code and reproduce the results by running the corresponding
file `run_simulation.R` in each simulation directory. The `run_simulation.R`
file will automatically save the results in the `figures/` directory. 
For example:

```
Rscript eval_bike_sharing/run_simulation.R
```


### Requirements

This project was developed and tested using R version 4.4.1 and it requires the 
following R packages:

#### Not CRAN packages

- `arf` version $\geq$ 0.2.2 installed by running `pak::pkg_install("bips-hb/arf")`
- `seqknockoff` installed by running `pak::pkg_install("kormama1/seqknockoff")`
- `cs` installed by running `pak::pkg_install("christophM/paper_conditional_subgroups")`
- `cpi` version $\geq$ 0.1.5 installed by running `pak::pkg_install("bips-hb/cpi")`

#### CRAN packages

- `ggplot2`
- `batchtools`
- `data.table`
- `here`
- `envalysis`
- `ggpubr`
- `ggsci`
- `fastDummies`
- `Metrics`
- `mlr3verse`
- `ranger`
- `microbenchmark`
- `pak`
- `dplyr`


**Note:** The script `setup.R` ensures that all necessary R packages are installed 
and is called before any analysis is run. It also automatically sets up the 
environment by creating required folders, setting the ggplot2 theme, and 
managing CPU usage during simulations.

## Citation

```bibtex
@article{Blesch2025, 
  title     = {Conditional Feature Importance with Generative Modeling Using 
               Adversarial Random Forests},
  author    = {Blesch, Kristin and Koenen, Niklas and Kapar, Jan and Golchian, 
               Pegah and Burk, Lukas and Loecher, Markus and Wright, Marvin N.},
  journal   = {Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence},
  year      = {2025},
  volume    = {39}, 
  number    = {15}, 
  pages     = {15596-15604},
  url       = {https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/33712}, 
  doi       = {10.1609/aaai.v39i15.33712}
}
```
